Task/brugger1/2022 04 01 python expression tutorial (#17543)
visit-dav/visit: src/doc/tutorials/PythonExpressions.rst

.. _Tutorials_Python_Expressions:

Python Expressions
==================

.. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2

This tutorial describes using Python Expressions.

Python expressions overview
---------------------------

> 

Reviewer: I think its worth adding some motivation about *why* and/or *when* someone might want to use Python expressions. And, I think we could benefit from at least one link from here back to the [section on expressions](https://visit-sphinx-github-user-manual.readthedocs.io/en/develop/using_visit/Quantitative/Expressions.html#expressions)

Maybe...

When the available expressions fail to provide needed functionality, users can extend VisIt's expression system in arbitrary ways using Python Expressions. However, Python Expressions require users to become somewhat converscent in detailed aspects of how mesh and variable data is represented in terms of VTK objects as well as how they are decomposed and processed in parallel. Nonetheless, Python expressions provide a powerful approach to filling in gaps in needed functionality.

> VisIt_ contains the ability to create expressions using the Python scripting language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VisIt_ supports extending the available expressions using the Python scripting language.
```

> Python expressions run in the compute engine and run in parallel when VisIt_ is run in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python expressions are run on the compute engine and will run in parallel whenever a) the compute engine is parallel and b) the input dataset is decomposed for parallel.
```

> Python expressions operate on vtkDataSets, which provide access to variables as well as the mesh coordinates and topology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python expressions operate on ``vtkDataSets``, which provide access to mesh variables as well as the mesh coordinates and topology.
```

> Python expressions also have access to VisIt_'s metadata as well as access to MPI when running in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VisIt_'s Python Expression system also provides access to methods in VisIt_'s CLI module (e.g. ``visitmodule`` as well as Python MPI methods when running in parallel.
```

Reviewer: Don't we also provide `numpy` in this env. too?

Author: I'm not sure about access to visitmodule. visitmodule is used to drive VisIt and I don't believe using it would work. Numpy is definitely available.

Reviewer: Oh, maybe I am missing the correct verbiage...I mean instead of culling out *just* metadata, the entire set of CLI methods are available. If thats not `visitmodule` maybe its just the VisIt **CLI**.

Author: This sentence was intended to indicate that the expression has access to things like avtMetaData.

Reviewer: Hmmm...do you reall mean `avtDatabaseMetadata` and friends in the `AVT` library? When you say *...like avtMetaData...*, I think you mean like anything available through **CLI** functions.

Author: I really mean things like avtMetaData. I don't think using the functions from visitmodule would actually work, at least it wouldn't do what you want. For example, if you did an `AddPlot` or `SetPlotOptions`, I don't think things are wired up to have that impact the current VisIt instance. I suppose you could launch a new instance of VisIt and do stuff with it, but I'm not sure we want people doing that.

Reviewer: Ah, ok. I totally misunderstood then. I thought all the **CLI** functions are indeed available too...even if some wouldn't necessarily make sense to use.

> Python expressions return a vtkDataArray, which allows returning new variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The job of all Python expressions is to return a ``vtkDataArray`` object representing a new variable on the mesh upon which the expression is evaluated.
```

> It isn't possible to change the mesh topology or coordinates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not possible to change mesh topology or coordinates *within* a Python expression. However, it is possible to *combine* Python expressions with :ref:`Cross Mesh Field Evaluation (CMFE) functions <Comparison_Expressions>`_ which can have the effect of changing mesh topology and coordinates.
```

> The functionality is available through the *GUI* and the *CLI*.

Reviewer: Aren't terms like **GUI**, **CLI**, **Expressions** window, etc. supposed to be bolded? I think our docs say that.

When using the *GUI*, they can be created in the *Expressions* window. 
When using the *CLI*, they can be created with the *DefinePythonExpression* function.

Creating a Python Expression with the GUI
-----------------------------------------

We'll now go through the steps required to create a Python expression using the GUI.

Let's start by opening a file and creating a plot.

> 1. Open the file "curv2d.silo".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the file ``curv2d.silo``.
```

> 2. Create a Psuedocolor plot of *d*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create a Psuedocolor plot of ``d``.
```

Now let's go ahead and create the Python expression.

3. Go to *Controls->Expressions*.
4. This brings up the Expressions window.
5. Click *New* in the *Expression list* to create a new expression.
6. Change the *Name* in the *Definition* section to "MyExpression".
7. Click on the *Python expression editor* tab in the *Definition* section.
8. Select *Insert variable...->Scalars->d* to add *d* to the *Arguments* text field.
9. Click *Load script->Template->Simple filter* to add a template of a Python filter in the *Python expression script* editor. 

.. figure:: images/PythonExpression-GUI1.png

   The Expressions window with the simple filter template

At this point you modify the template to create your expression.
There are a couple of ways in which you can develop your script.

> In either case you would make modifications to the script and then try it out using the Pseudocolor plot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common practice is to make modifications to the script and test it using the Pseudocolor plot.
```

Changes to the script can be made either by modifying the script in the *Python expression script* editor or modifying it in an external text editor and then reloading the script.

> Generaly speaking, modifying the script in the *Python expression script* editor is easier than doing it in an external text editor except that it is difficult to tell how many spaces are at the beginning of the line since the editor doesn't use a fixed width font.

Reviewer: Why don't we use a fixed width font? Can we fix this? Is there already a ticket for that? Given the significance of indentation in python parsing, I am not sure editing in the GUI could ever be *easier* for anything other than uncommonly simplistic cases.

Reviewer: BTW...wasn't intending to suggest this spacing issue be fixed in this PR. Just that we ought to add an issue for that. I mean if its as simple as causing Qt to use an appropriate font.

The following steps can be used to iteratively develop your script using the *Python expression script* editor.

1. Edit the script.
2. Click the *Apply* button.
3. Go to *Variables->d* to change the variable to *d*.
   The first time you try your script this won't be necessary since the variable is already *d*.
4. Go to *Variables->MyExpression* to change the variable to "MyExpression" and execute the script.

Developing the script in a text editor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

The following steps can be used to iteratively develop your script using a text editor.

Before you can modify the script you will need to save it.

1. Click *Save script* to save the script.

Now you are ready to modify the script.

2. Edit the script with your favorit editor.
3. Go to *Load script->File* to load the script.
4. Click the *Apply* button.
5. Go to *Variables->d* to change the variable to *d*.
   The first time you try your script this won't be necessary since the variable is already *d*.
6. Go to *Variables->MyExpression* to change the variable to "MyExpression" and execute the script.
 
Python Expression Example 1
---------------------------

> This example will operate on 2D meshes and takes the distance around the edges of each cell and multiplies it by the value of the cell.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example operates on 2D meshes and takes the distance around the edges of each cell and multiplies it by the value of the cell.
```

It demonstrates accessing the coordinates and topology of the mesh as well as a variable.

Here is the example script.

> .. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe

Reviewer 2: It might be useful to add comments in the example script regarding what the VTK calls are doing, like for  `SetNumberOfComponents` and `SetNumberOfTuples`, `GetTuple1`, `SetTuple1`.
I know its documented further in the tutorial, but having it in the script is helpful for those just reading the script.

   :lines: 11-48

> Let's start off by creating a Pseudocolor plot from the expression.

Reviewer: FWIW, our documentation also says to [avoid contractions](https://www.e-education.psu.edu/styleforstudents/c1_p15.html). Now, its certainly possible that not everyone read and/or signed off on all the bullets in our [quick ref](https://visit-sphinx-github-user-manual.readthedocs.io/en/develop/dev_manual/ContributingToDocumentation/index.html#quick-reference) section but there are notes there about trying not to use contractions. My preference is to avoid them.

1. Copy the script into the *Python expression script* editor.
2. Click the *Apply* button.
3. Go to *Variables->MyExpression* to change the variable to the expression.

.. figure:: images/PythonExpression-Plot1.png

   The Pseudocolor plot of MyExpression

Now let's take a look at the script and see what each portion does.

The ``__init__`` method provides information about the expression, including

* That it inherits from ``SimplePythonExpression``.
* The name of the expression.
* A description of the expression.
* A flag indicating that the output is not a point centered value.
* A flag that the output is a scalar.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe

>    :lines: 13-18

Reviewer: I worry about using the `:lines:` directive for this. I mean, it works...now. But if anyone changes the script in any way *above* these lines, it silently corrupts what gets rendered in our docs.

I think using regex is better. You can put `# key A {` and `# key A }` (or some such convention) at end of lines you want to bracket or add a sep. comment lines.

I know this makes the python code look a little less like it would ordinarily. I am not sure there is a better option.

Author: I think adding some type of tags will make the script really hard to read when looking at the script in it's entirety. I added a very prominent warning at the top of each of the two scripts that are referenced in the tutorial that the line numbers need to be updated in the Python Expressions tutorial if the scripts are changed.

The ``modify_contract`` method can be used to request special information for the expression from VisIt_.
In this case it is a no-op.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 19-20

The ``derive_variable`` method performs the real work of the expression.
It is passed the input vtkDataSet and the domain_id.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 21-23

The following lines get the vtkDataArray for the cell values and the number of cells.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 24-25

> The following lines set the output vtkDataArray to be an array of floats with 1 component and ncells.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following lines set the output vtkDataArray to be an array of floats with 1 component and ncells values.
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 26-28

Now we loop over the cells, setting the output value for each cell.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 29

The following lines get the current cell and the number of edges in the cell.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 30-31

Now we loop over the edges, calculating the sum of the lengths of the edges.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 32-34

We calculate the length of the edge from the 3D coordinates of the end points of the edge, which we add to the sum.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 35-42

Once we have summed the lengths of the edges we multiply the sum by the cell value and set it in the result.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 43-45

Once we have finished processing all the cells, we return the vtkDataArray.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 46

Using VTK in Python
-------------------

> The VTK Python interface mirrors the C++ interface.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the C++ interface here.

Also, here are some python examples hosted by kitware...

https://kitware.github.io/vtk-examples/site/Python/

Reviewer: Oh, ok, you link to specific objects C++ below. Thats fine.

To find out information on a particular VTK class, type the name of the class in your favorite search engine.

Here are links to some VTK classes that will be of most use to you.

* `vtkCell <https://vtk.org/doc/nightly/html/classvtkCell.html>`_
* `vtkDataArray <https://vtk.org/doc/nightly/html/classvtkDataArray.html>`_
* `vtkDataSet <https://vtk.org/doc/nightly/html/classvtkDataSet.html>`_
* `vtkDoubleArray <https://vtk.org/doc/nightly/html/classvtkDoubleArray.html>`_
* `vtkFloatArray <https://vtk.org/doc/nightly/html/classvtkFloatArray.html>`_

Using a Python Expression with the CLI
--------------------------------------

The Python expression we just created can also be used with the CLI.

We'll start by saving the script we just created.

> 1. Click *Save script* and save the script with the name "MyExpression.py".

Reviewer: There are perhaps multiple cases of use of `"some file or variable name"` which should probably be in code typeset instead of double quotes as in 

```suggestion
1. Click *Save script* and save the script with the name ``MyExpression.py``.
```

Python Expressions Overview
---------------------------

When the available expressions fail to provide needed functionality, users can extend VisIt_'s expression system in arbitrary ways using Python expressions.
However, Python expressions require users to become somewhat converscent in detailed aspects of how mesh and variable data is represented in terms of VTK objects as well as how they are decomposed and processed in parallel.
Nonetheless, Python expressions provide a powerful approach to filling in gaps in needed functionality.

Python expressions are run on the compute engine and will run in parallel whenever a) the compute engine is parallel and b) the input dataset is decomposed for parallel.
Python expressions operate on ``vtkDataSets``, which provide access to mesh variables as well as the mesh coordinates and topology.
Python expression also have access to VisIt_'s metadata as well as access to MPI when running in parallel.
Python expressions return a ``vtkDataArray``, which allows returning new variables.
It is not possible to change the mesh topology or coordinates *within* a Python expression.

> However, it is possible to *combine* Python expressions with :ref:`Cross Mesh Field Evaluation (CMFE) functions <Comparison_Expressions>`_ which can have the effect of changing mesh topology and coordinates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it is possible to *combine* Python expressions with :ref:`Cross Mesh Field Evaluation (CMFE) functions <Comparison_Expressions>` which can have the effect of changing mesh topology and coordinates.
```

6. Go to *Variables->MyExpression* to change the variable to "MyExpression" and execute the script.
 
Python Expression Example 1
---------------------------

This example adds two cell centered variables.
It demonstrates accessing multiple variables and performing simple operations with them to generate a result.

Here is the example script.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
   :lines: 18-47

Let us start off by creating a Pseudocolor plot from the expression.

1. Copy the script into the *Python expression script* editor.
2. Click the *Apply* button.
3. Go to *Variables->MyExpression* to change the variable to the expression.

.. figure:: images/PythonExpressions-Plot1.png

   The Pseudocolor plot of MyExpression

Now let us take a look at the script and see what each portion does.

The ``__init__`` method provides information about the expression, including

* That it inherits from ``SimplePythonExpression``.
* The name of the expression.
* A description of the expression.
* A flag indicating that the output is not a point centered value.
* A flag that the output is a scalar.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe

>    :lines: 19-24

Reviewer: Regarding `:lines:` and the warning at top of the file, I guess that works ok. If we had CI support for this we could just add a dependency that would warn ~~committers~~ (whoops...only *hooks* work for committers) *pushers* that they might wanna make sure things still line up.

That said, Sphinx and reStructuredText are complex enough its easy to miss what is available in the way of functionality to help with this and so I just wanna ask, would this be any better...

```
.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_1.vpe
    :start-at: def __init__(self):
    :end-before: def modify_contract(self,contract):
```
That gets everything that might ever appear in the `__init__()` method regardless of line number.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_2.vpe
   :lines: 34-37

Now we loop over the cells, setting the output value for each cell.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_2.vpe
   :lines: 38

The following lines get the current cell and the number of edges in the cell.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_2.vpe
   :lines: 39-42

Now we loop over the edges, calculating the sum of the lengths of the edges.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_2.vpe
   :lines: 43-45

We calculate the length of the edge from the 3D coordinates of the end points of the edge, which we add to the sum.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_2.vpe
   :lines: 46-54

Once we have summed the lengths of the edges we multiply the sum by the cell value and set it in the result.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_2.vpe
   :lines: 55-58

Once we have finished processing all the cells, we return the ``vtkDataArray``.

.. literalinclude:: ../../test/tests/hybrid/python_example_2.vpe

>    :lines: 59

Reviewer: Another observation here...instead of interleaving a line of prose documenting what is happening in reStructurecText and literal including a few lines from the actual `.vpe` file and going back and forth between these many times (8 times above I think), why not just do the documentation (as comments...there are some comments there that more or less duplicate what is written here in reStructuredText) and literalinclude the whole file, perahpts with a `:start-at:` directive that bypasses the boilerplate VisIt comment header.
